# Thoughts on how AI will impact the jobs market

### Introduction

General interest in AI and machine learning have increased markedly in recent years, partly thanks to a number of high profile successes, for example DeepMind’s AlphaGo beating Lee Sedol at the board game of Go. All mainstream articles on the subject tend to focus on one of two things: will robots take over the world (with unpleasant consequences for us humans) and will a robot take my job? The interest in the first question has no doubt been sparked by a number of sci-fi movies but there are certainly a number of interesting moral and ethical questions that need to be addressed here. In this piece, though, I am going to focus on the question of how AI will affect the jobs market.

Numerous studies have been done on this by respected firms, most recent by PwC (see here - http://pwc.blogs.com/press_room/2017/03/up-to-30-of-existing-uk-jobs-could-be-impacted-by-automation-by-early-2030s-but-this-should-be-offse.html) which predicts that up to 30% of jobs could be impacted by automation by the 2030s. Another (see here - https://arstechnica.co.uk/business/2016/12/federal-report-ai-could-threaten-up-to-47-percent-of-jobs-in-two-decades/) predicts that up to 47% of jobs could disappear in two decades. So are they right? 

### Progress of AI

It is, of course, impossible to say definitely but it might be instructive to look at the last big change, the internet revolution, which has up-ended the distribution model of the majority of industries. In general, humans overestimate the short term impact of a new technology and underestimate the long term impact. In the mid-90s, the dotcom boom was in full swing and formed a classic bubble. Pets.com was a famous example, launching in August 1998, raising $300 million of venture capital and then going bust in November 2000. Now, it is hard to overstate the effect that the internet has had on all our lives. Hardly anyone predicted the smartphone revolution, the emergence of the highly-profitable business models that Facebook and Apple employ and the way that Amazon has completely changed the retail landscape. So, what does this tell us about the future of AI?

It certainly implies that the changes that occur in the long-term will be greater than anyone expects and develop in unexpected directions. What seems clear as well as is that this technological revolution is moving faster than previous ones, partly thanks to the sharing of knowledge on the internet. Wired predicted in 2014 in this article (https://www.wired.com/2014/05/the-world-of-computer-go/) that it would take another decade for a computer to beat the best human at ‘Go’ - in fact, it took less than a year and half. Jeff Hawkins, founded of Numenta, has compared the state of AI now to computing in the early 1950s - less than twenty years later, computers had helped put a man on the moon. While the future evolution of AI is very uncertain, can we say more about the future evolution of the jobs market?

### Impact on the jobs market

Ever since the Luddites, a group of English textile workers, destroyed their weaving machinery in protest against the technological progress that they feared would take their jobs, every technological revolution is history has had doommongers predicting mass unemployment. But in fact, so far every technological revolution has resulted in a high net increase of jobs – jobs destroyed in one area are created in another and new industries are created to safisfy new wants and desires. What is striking over the last 40 years or so is changes in wages. In the book ‘The Second Machine Age’, the authors  describe how a worker in the USA earning the median wage is not better off in real terms while the mean wage has kept on increasing. So the rewards of economic growth are going disproportionally to those at the top, and the jobs market seems to be bifurcating between high skilled jobs and low skilled jobs. There has never been a better time in human history to be well educated. This phenomenon has been accelerated by the internet meaning the competition is no longer local but global and resulting in a handful of companies which dominate their respective areas (think Google, Facebook, Amazon). It seems that we can also not rely on technology to create jobs as we could in the past. In 1979, General Motors made $11 billion with a workforce of 840,000. In 2012, Google made $14 billion with only 38,000 employees. In 2014, Facebook bought Whatsapp, which only had 55 employees, for $19 billion. It seems likely that both trends will continue, if not accelerate, through the AI revolution.

So what’s the optimistic case for the future of the jobs market? Technological revolutions have always have created jobs in the past and everyone always says ‘it’s going to be different this time’. What is undeniably different this time though is the pace of change. ‘The concern is not that robots will take human jobs and render humans unemployable’, says Jason Furman, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, said in a talk, the worry is the pace of change ‘could lead to sustained periods of time with a large fraction of people not working’. Optimists also argue that the best results come when human and computer work together in tandem, pointing to the fact that a skilled human and computer can beat just a computer at chess.

The pessimists argue that this revolution is different from previous ones, and not just because of the speed of change. In this book, ‘The Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of Mass Unemployment’, the author Martin Ford argues that because of economic growth, labour is getting more and more specialised which makes it more suspectible to automation. In addition, once an algorithm works, it can be reproduced and at virtually zero marginal cost meaning that any advance can propogate quickly through the economy. In the past, when a new machine was invented, often significant investment was required to roll this out and the process took time. Martin Ford encourages us to consider a thought experiment: imagine that a robot species arrive on earth and make an offer to every country to replace their human workers, not demanding any payment, working round the clock and not consuming any goods at all. Countries that didn’t accept this offer would certainly be much less competitive than countries that did. At first, profits would rise dramatically but then companies would quickly realise that the demand in the economy would have been hollowed out. The basis of our economy would be undermined.

### Conclusion

I personally am more pessimistic than optimistic. I think the trends identified above will continue and indeed accelerate and people who design the machines will get disproportionally greater rewards. I do think that there will be an increase in jobs which are uniquely well suited to humans such as nursing and physiotherapy but that these jobs will not be as well paid as the jobs which are replaced. What I find worrying is that very few politicians are thinking about these issues and its impact on society, public services and the tax base. This long term challenge is surely much more important than the shorter term disruption that Brexit provides. But do take these predictions with a pinch of salt, as Niels Bohr observed, ‘Prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s about the future’…
